Okay, I'm on here with Mr. John Maggs at Maggs Brothers at 50 Berkeley Square in England, and let's just pretend that's not there.
Right, yes, for it ought to be there as an introduction.
You were telling me about the formation of this.
Yes, well, this is Masquerades, who I knew for quite a long time.
He was buying books from my father and he's been dead 25 years old it's a long while ago, and he used to buy books from us books about Greece in the days when you could buy them quite readily. We had a room full of books about Greece in the days when my father was selling books to the king of Greece as well and who happens to be as well in London now that's being a police officer and he would come in
used to be open and he could have the choice of anything he wanted and he was a delightful man as well which made it easier and so my father and he got on wanted to work together was he knowledgeable did he know he became more and more knowledgeable as time went on was he one of these collectors you do you think who bought books to for the pleasure of owning them for the pleasure but do you think he came to know them did
was being a linguist.
That's very important.
With his background, so he was equally at home in, as far as I think, most European languages.
When you say he looked like in Greek books, could we be a little more specific?
Are we talking about really old books?
When we say books about Greece, could we be a little more specific about what kinds of books?
Well, because obviously a lot of it on the subject of Greek independence.
But Greek altogether, that's the thing.
Greek history.
Not political.
Yes.
It wasn't a political collection, per se.
No, it was travel.
It was travel.
Illustrated books, important authors.
In the finest condition.
That was the point.
and then he liked to think that he was known as a great collector and he got this particular fascination with Troy and the history of Troy and so he formed an exhibition which went on
in Bloomington.
Really?
So they must have a catalogue.
And he helped with the catalogue.
So I can get one of those.
Yes, exactly.
And obviously the idea was moving gradually that the Lilly Library would buy the whole library.
But Lilly perhaps overplayed their credits a little bit.
I think so.
Well, they're not as... Possibly they haven't got as much money as they had.
And they did, to be plain, they rather mess the widow about.
He died very suddenly.
He came in to tell me one day that he was dying of cancer.
And so he had a year or so to wind up his affairs.
But when he did die, there was the wife holding this library with two daughters of 20, 25, 30, that sort of thing.
And that library was the principal asset.
How would you judge it?
Would you judge it as a preeminent library?
Yes, very very much so.
And then, of course, at the same time, Mr. Blackmer died as well, who also had a preeminent Greek library.
And this gentleman's name is Mr. Blackmer.
B-L-A-C-K-M-E-R.
And he hired, no, he was American Greek, I don't know.
But anyway, he was in Athens.
And he hired a wonderful librarian to produce a catalogue of his library, which is out now, published by MAGS.
A magnificent library catalogue, which we can sell you if you want.
And that library went into Solvice and they had tremendous success in the way they handled it.
They are absolute experts of how they will promote.
They really are clever at it.
And so what they did when the sale came up, plain loads of Greeks would come over.
And Turks.
And some of them, I wonder even sometimes if they knew
what money they were bidding me.
Well, Sotheby's does give you a status in seven pounds instead.
Yes, I know.
Well, that's a hype as well.
But some of those prices will not be surpassed probably for quite some time.
For Greek books?
For books of acquisition.
Now, why did Blackmer sell his collection?
He was dead.
Oh, he died?
Yes.
I'm sorry.
Which is the usual reason.
It sounded to me as if he were selling it.
No, he had prepared, he got a librarian to prepare a monumental catalog.
Uh-huh.
in his lifetime.
And you have a copy of that here which I can... Yes, which you can buy if you want.
It's quite expensive anyway, but it is beautifully produced.
But that's one of the, well, two of the great collections of just recent years.
But the thing we like to say so often is that books should be bought for the love of the book and the collection rather than the future investment potential.
Although they are a great thing for
potentially perhaps for a widow.
However, when you have a collection such as the Greek's collection, which is preeminent, and which is not likely to be replicated again, you almost would wish that it would stay again as a collection, wouldn't you?
Well, hello, love.
Please put your lunch.
Oh, how nice.
Another interview going on.
I'm talking, I'm drooling on about Mr. Lascarides.
Yeah.
One of the nicest of names.
Which is what I've got, too.
When a loving wife brings in your sandwiches... Oh, look, there was a question for you.
That was both... Gladys and Eileen.
Neither can come to a meeting next week.
You see, they're busy ladies.
This is the trouble.
And so, Christian, could Tim Waller come?
It's a great thing to marry well.
We're doing fine, by the way.
That's just a letter of introduction.
But what we're talking about is very useful to me.
I would like at some point, I'd just like to finish with this Lascariti thing, because it's very interesting.
One area I am exploring is institutional collecting, such as the Lilly Library.
I've already spent four days at the University of Texas, for instance,
That's why I really wanted to see Mr. Roder.
This is 30 years ago.
Who do you want to see?
I was going to see Roder this morning, and he unexpectedly was called away.
He had done even a lot of lecturing in Texas, too.
Well, he was basically their British agent.
I know, yes.
Texas was a very unusual case.
He was an extraordinary bookseller.
Rudy Feldman.
Rudy Feldman, yes.
He's a focus.
Did you know him at all?
Very well, yes.
What did you tell me about him?
Why do you think, how do you think he became, I'm not going to be timid with you.
He was no scholar.
That was my viewpoint.
How did he manage to become the exclusive agent for the University of Texas in the United States?
You better be very careful because there's probably a lot of dirty washing there.
I think I know some of it.
Between him and, what was it, Ransom.
Harry Ransom.
Yes.
really worked out oil well until it was nearly dry.
But the result was that they may have paid too much at the time, but they got the books.
I've been and seen these great roomfuls of books in that skyscraper.
They bought far beyond their capacity to absorb them.
But on the other hand, that's when the books were thick on the ground.
And they bought them.
The fact whether Ludy Feldman charged them too much for things is another matter.
You don't think, and we can treat this confidentially as well, I mean, I wouldn't embarrass you, but you don't think there was any kind of hanky-panky going on between Feldman and you?
Goodness knows.
I have nothing to support them, by the way.
I think that he was very comfortable working with them.
Feldman was an unusual booksetter.
He wasn't doing it the way we do.
He did, for instance,
Texas might have X amount of dollars to spend in a given year.
Yeah, and you could use it.
And it would be gone.
Yes, exactly.
But they would come across something that they would want.
Feldman would buy it, charge them 10 percent per year, and the collection would then go to Texas, and it would take for two or three years down the road.
Whether or not that's one other way of doing it, I don't know.
It is an unorthodox way of doing it, and it's an interesting way of doing it.
If you could do a lot of scholarly research on that, it would be quite useful.
Because that was the biggest thing, 20 years ago, whenever it was the building up of that library in Texas.
From about 1958 to 73.
And now there's possibly no money at all.
Well, the state is pretty shaky.
Yeah, but the university is still, they still have money.
It's like the bunker home story.
Apparently, I was talking to Tom Staley just last month.
He said he's going to have a big announcement he made.
It sounds like he bought something that he wants to spend some dollars.
They don't have the money that they had 15 years ago, certainly.
One thing you'll have noticed is the way that so often a collector who works in one area collects one type of thing, likes to think that he will die with his name in life.
there's so many opens it's unbelievable exactly and I'm just in the edges of one at the moment where a yachtsman a British yachtsman in 1908 started to form a library and an association for yachtsmen 1908 and he bought with very expert help he bought all the finest books he could to do with the sea and sea charts
And he died intestate and unmarried.
But these things remained with the association that he founded.
And there now is the most wonderful library.
And the Yotsmans Association.
Can you name the gentleman?
His name was Hanson.
It's his library catalog.
And the Cruising Association Library.
The Cruising Association Library Catalogue, that's O-G-U-E.
1931.
His name.
This is his book here, right?
Yes.
This is a catalog of his library.
It was founded in 1908.
Persons of Nautical Sympathies, combining as amateurs to advance the knowledge of the C.S.
Pats, and all that anything about them is.
He was looking for his name, so I passed this, and it's on the top page there.
Gathered by Herbert, H-E-R-B-E-R-T-J.
Hanson, H-A-N-S-O-N, comma, O period, B period, E period.
That is our initials for life.
Yeah.
What is that?
Whatever was that?
Is that a title of some sort?
O-B-E, Order of the Virgin Empire.
Okay.
Yes.
Which is quite distinguished.
And this was published at Chiltern Court, London.
I'm just saying, so I can look this book up at Harvard.
I'm sure we'll have a copy of it.
Not necessarily.
And anyway, the...
The association grew and grew and grew till it's got, I've forgotten, 5,000 members or something now.
And it now has the most magnificent premises for the time being in the marina in the city of London, near the ivory house.
How did they manage to keep his collection?
How did they retain it?
He just passed to the association.
Did he pass it?
Did he make the provisions for this?
Apparently not.
But it had always been there.
It had always been in the castle room of the association.
Had there been an heir, it might well have wound up in the auction halls.
Exactly.
How do you feel about that?
Well, that's the point.
I've been, for instance, to the New York.com.
There's no books, anything to touch this library.
But the point has come now, where that is now the association's principal asset,
It's worth certainly a million pounds.
And they need new premises.
So they've got a double problem.
Firstly, they want to ensure that this marvellous collection stays as a collection because these are a lot of them are books of maps and sea charts.
If they went under the hammer, they would almost certainly be cut up and turned into framed maps, which would be tragic.
And yet at the same time, they need the money.
because if they can have some money at least from it then they get themselves new premises the idea would be premises that they own in London where they can continue to do what they think is their right thing I'm wearing a tie now is to encourage yachting and so a scheme is being developed at the moment it's a good runner
where the University of Cambridge might be prepared to house the whole collection as the Cruising Association, I agree, where... Oh, right, okay, yeah.
Where... Right.
Oh, I can arrange cash, yes.
Yes, right.
And they would be prepared to house it
insure it, look after it, make it accessible, provide a reading room where members of the association could go to see the books.
Geographically it is removed from the... Well, look, Cambridge is very central, and the train service is very good indeed, and give them a certain amount of money, well, quite a substantial amount of money as well, and it's quite an
retain title to it but it has a home and it's open to scholars and it's in a scholarly so it would satisfy several conditions at once one would be that the collection would remain intact it would not be destroyed or broken up it would be available to scholars and yet the association would have some of the financial benefit from it that would be a good deal so it might be a good deal we'll put this together the financial general process committee
And I'm the old librarian, so I've had a bit of interest in this.
How would you feel if this collection would have been broken up?
It would be tragic.
Because you're a book dealer.
Exactly.
And yet, I make my livelihood partly from breaking up collections.
Because if you wanted to start a book collection, you'd have to start somewhere, and the books that you would be buying would have come sometime from somebody's own collection.
And that's good.
Which is what we exist for, is to re-
It is important that the books find a new home.
I mean, there's nothing bad.
But on the other hand, the collector is generally secretive, generally.
He can't possibly have people in his home other than very, very special friends.
You couldn't have random readers, because they might be thieves as well.
Especially when you've got books that have got pictures and maps in them.
Well, that means you've got to have a reading room.
You've got to have supervising staff.
And then, at the same time, you've got the enormous escalating values.
Where, in that Blasterides library, no, not in that, in the Brachman, there's that sort of thing, where one book was Hobhouse's Albania.
And I used to sell that book perhaps for £100, and somebody at the auction sale went and spent, I think, £5,000 on it.
Well, that makes a problem of how to house it in security.
We look after it.
When you say somebody paid,
But also implicitly acknowledges that there's an underbidder who went for 4,500.
Not always.
It can be a reserve.
It can even be the nasty thing you don't talk about, somebody on the back wall.
Yes.
It's a thing you don't talk about, but it happens.
It's been alleged by a fellow by the name of Charles Hamilton
who I've interviewed.
The autograph dealer, yes.
An interesting man.
Would you talk to Graham Arato as well?
Those are the two... Have you spoken to him?
No, I haven't talked to Arato yet, no.
Who had that wonderful article in The New Yorker about him.
That's right.
The profile.
And who stopped an auction at some of his in New York.
And who challenged the auctioneer to produce the underbier.
And there wasn't one.
So they had to start the biddingy beer.
And Graham Arato bought the thing for a great deal less.
Now, do you think that was a correct thing for him to do?
It was a correct thing to do, and we all cheered him on that.
There's another collection I saw at Cambridge.
There was a marvellous man in London who was a doctor and who collected books about psychiatry.
In its widest sense, psychiatry, madness, all sorts of stuff.
So there's a technical out there.
German collection.
I only cried your end of it.
Yes.
Which was given to a Jewish chap to take to safety to the States before the war.
And he kept it all through the war.
And now only last year or so, he put it in the facilities in New York for sale as his white property, which it wasn't.
And apparently the rumour went all around New York very quickly.
that this stuff was really hot and shouldn't really be sold.
Was it sold?
It had been entrusted to him for the good of the Jewish nation.
Can you tell me the news of what?
I'll check it out.
I don't speak German, but Hochstuhl is what it is anyway.
And it was?
Was it sold itself?
Yes.
And it went through.
And we, alas, bought one lot out of this for no less than the British Museum.
And we got it here and we paid for it.
And in no time we got a visit from the representative of the Attorney General of New York, Mr. Edwards.
Really?
That's a fascinating story.
And we said, well, we can't hand this over.
We bought this correctly as auction for a major client in this country or something.
And finally in the end I had to capitulate and send it back to New York and have our money back more or less.
So this was material that was stolen during the war?
No, it was sent correctly from Berlin or wherever, when the Nazis were closing in, for safety to the States.
But the man who took it, instead of handing it over to the Jewish organization in the States, didn't do it.
And yes, exciting, isn't it?
That's for his notes, isn't it?
Yes.
Yes, okay, because Robert's handling this.
He's one of the most knowledgeable men in the world who works with us.
What is his name?
John Collins.
And he is the world of Barley on perhaps the greatest literary forger of all time, Thomas J. Wise.
Thomas J. Wise figures in his book.
He's doing the new edition.
Really?
Which will be out fairly soon.
He's in a vast state of preparation.
may have to talk to him with a lot of fresh information i'm coming back by the way i tell you you shouldn't have started this because it could go on forever well i'm going to let it go on until you kick me out yes well i must be doing that um there's there's no end to it tell me a little bit tell me how much time i have by the way so i can i can pace myself and kind of cover a few of the areas that i've lost it anyway yes because i've promised to make a few phone calls as well so anyway it's gone yes all right yes okay
So this was stolen material?
It wasn't stolen.
It was... He appropriated it.
It was misappropriated.
Misappropriated.
And then he consigned it to South Wales?
Yes.
In the name of his wife.
And the thing ran smoothly.
John Marion should be asked about this thing, shouldn't he, I think?
And some ladies started to make a fuss in the press in New York.
was not entitled to be sold at auction.
Sold to me is between us and doing some pretty interesting things lately.
You have to be very careful what you write about that, but I get quite distressed with the way they do these things.
You know, the thing with the painting with it.
That's a buzzer on the front door says I know that someone's opened the door.
It's going to be quite useful.
because stealing is a problem.
Nobody plays a great deal here.
Did you hear about the case in the States where they just arrested this guy out in Iowa?
Yes.
Have you heard... Yes, we've heard the fringes of that one, but I was a little bit... I have all the cuttings from Iowa, by the way.
Would you like me to send you some of these?
Another ghastly one is the, of course, is the Mormon one.
Well, that's murder.
Which involves sending... Bombs.
Mail bombs.
And as long as you kept it level,
it wouldn't go off but as soon as you took it well that was a case of crime this kid in iowa is really a video kleptomaniac he apparently really steals the things not for greed but for the object yeah he's now they've sent him to a place yeah to be looked at to be looking at the creole of ivory in chicago and what's really amusing in a bizarre sort of way is they don't want to admit that they've had things stolen
Isn't it amazing?
Well, that's back to this one, that I have had to ensure that these yachtsmen's books are under lock and key, which means the members can't see them except by appointment at the moment.
Well, then people will say, what's the good of them if they can't be seen?
If they were put on open shelves, they would be stolen.
That's correct.
They have to be protected.
And so I'm afraid in a case like this, probably the only thing is going to be...
a home where they can be under proper security.
Tell me a little bit about being a fourth generation bookman.
What's that?
Well, you were brought up.
Exactly.
From your first memories, you must have books.
Of my bedroom, even full of books.
And the reverence.
Yes.
And one of them was, never did you put a teacup down on a book.
And if we children took a book off any of my father's shelves,
to take to our bedroom to read, he'd see the gap and he'd search the house till he found that book to get back in there.
And we'd say, well, what's the point of it?
Why can't we have it?
Why has it got to be?
And we didn't understand.
Did you know from the earliest days that you would be a book-learing yourself?
No, no.
Tell me how this came to pass.
Oh, come on.
But what did you think you would be?
What did you want to be?
And so I went off to the Navy for three whole years.
I spent three years as an evil officer.
And then when that was over, would I accept what you call the GI charter to go to university with a free place?
And the father's comment was, well, you've wasted enough time now.
It's three years gone.
This time you got started on some work.
But in those days, you started at the very bottom.
You were given no encouragement, no money.
You were almost, almost made unwelcome.
And you just had to put up with it.
They're talking about here.
Yes, and it was the same in other bookshops as well.
Tony Rota may well tell you the same, because he came into that business from the world of something else.
I forgot now, politics or whatever it was.
Maybe his son will come into it now.
But we're almost the oldest left now.
Our young son is on holiday today.
So he's made five.
He's a good bookseller.
He's Edward May.
He's made himself a great expert, for instance, on T. Lawrence.
So he's busy building T. Lawrence collections now.
For individuals?
For one particular individual, yes.
That's an amazing story.
In other words, what happens is that people will come into the door sometimes, come in the front shop, and they almost say, I want to be a book collector.
How shall I start?
And what have you got already?
Have you got any books?
He doesn't know where to collect when he comes to it.
He possibly doesn't.
It's very, very wonderful if you do act.
and to get somebody who's just beginning who's just suddenly got the idea they'd like to be a book collector and of course the first thing to do is to link up with a good dealer that you can get on with and there's a different dealer for every sort of person and a dealer that you can get on with and trust and don't go first to the auction room don't go go to the auction room to sit and watch and listen but go to the bookshops
And you can say, why is this book more than that one?
What's the point?
And then the book seller will carefully explain to you why that copy is so much better.
And there will be a price on it.
Is this the satisfaction as a book dealer in building collections for other people?
It is.
Because are you a collector, by the way, yourself?
Not really, but the price is now.
But the satisfaction for you?
There's one of my own books on that book.
that he used to love to collect.
That's one of the greatest books in the world.
Which is?
The Trial of the Lieutenant Colonel G. Johnston for deposing William Bly.
Exactly.
And this was the man who was in command of the army in Australia.
And Bly, as governor, cut off the rackets to do the run.
He was a pretty good man.
But he was a disciplinarian.
They didn't like it.
It was a conflict colony for God's sake.
Yes, but this was the army.
And so what happened there was that the man in charge of the army, of the military detachment there, of the guards, arrested the governor and locked him up.
And this is the court-martial of the chap.
And this is the manuscript?
No, this is the printed book, which is extremely scarce anyway.
And this is Bly's own copy of it.
Oh, my goodness.
This was one of his coffees.
This was your father's?
This was my father's, yes.
Let's be very gentle with it.
Look.
We're a old boy.
To whoever it is, Campbell.
And my father put his signature in as well.
Frank B. Maggs.
And that's his mark where he put collated perfect Frank Maggs as well.
And the point about that is that that is
in its printed, in its boards.
It has to be about 200 years old, I would say.
Exactly.
It was done at the time.
Published at 12 shillings.
So it's had a bit of a repair on the spine.
12 shillings was expensive, I would think.
Yes.
Only a handful of copies of that were done.
Because so many of the great books of the Bly story were done in small numbers and are very, very scarce.
Now, you could come in and say, I want to collect Bly.
And one would say, well, how much money have you got to put into it?
And one has to say that, too, of course.
And so there's a collector I can think of, and the point is the living ones who are still collecting have to be anonymous.
That's the difficulty.
One can only talk about the dead ones.
For security purposes?
Exactly.
And because they want to be anonymous.
But a man who decided that he would collect Bly.
Do they want to be anonymous for security purposes?
Or because they want to be anonymous?
No, anonymous very much because of security.
See, I've made contact with Lady Eccles, for instance, Mary Hyatt.
Have you now?
The greatest in the world.
And you've seen.
That was the point about this.
Have you seen?
She is the number one lady book collector in the States.
Oh, indeed.
And the Roxburgh Club.
Look at that.
founded in 1812, I think that's right, of distinguished, almost all Englishmen originally, and then she is the first lady to be elected to the membership.
She's 40 members only, and nearly all dukes, and look at that, a great Englishman, and she has come in as the first lady.
She is very supportive of my project to finish the story.
Well, thank you for saying that.
But she is reluctant to talk about her collecting because she wrote me a letter.
Or about her husband's collection.
Or about her husband's collecting for security purposes.
And I have to be sympathetic to her.
That's right.
And I said at the outset, I will be sympathetic, I will understand.
But she is one of the greatest ladies in the world.
I said, but I hope you'll talk to me about collecting in general, and I believe she will.
Right now we're negotiating the terms of our discussion.
The fact is I've made contact, I've met her at the Gorgia Club.
Did you now?
Well, I met Mr. Scheide there, and I have been to Scheide's collection.
Of course, his is protected at Princeton, so he can talk.
But I had a lovely afternoon with him, four hours.
Yes.
He took out his 42-line Bible and placed it in right.
Your job is going to be how to digest all this down into anything usable.
Oh, I can do it.
Tell me just briefly, and then you can kick me out, but you mentioned when an individual walks in the door and says, I want to collect.
And I gather that the satisfaction for you, because you personally don't collect to any great extent,
Because of the, of course I've got a collection of books, but I could not be an active book collector now because I would be thinking that it should be used for business here.
It wouldn't be my own.
You'd have to separate.
You can't separate the two.
To be a really top-notch dealer, you want to think of the client, I guess.
If I were a sole trader, just in business on my own, but I've got all these other directors to think of.
If you have a wonderful bargain comes in, and you see a chance of a wonderful sale, well, you can't put it under your own bed.
Now, Rosenbach, for instance, on the other day... That was another matter.
He would say, if you don't buy it, I'm going to keep it for myself.
Right, exactly.
But it was a ploy, I think, as much as anything.
It was his own business, and so he could do that.
Yeah, and he could do it.
But I've got a thing about this man who decided he wanted to collect Admiral Bly.
Uh-huh, okay.
And so he made just two simple questions.
The best books about Bly cost £10,000 a piece, that sort of thing.
And there might be, what, ten of them, something of that sort.
And he hadn't got that sort of money.
And so he made the decision, instead, he would collect the ordinary books about Bly, which you might buy for £3, £5, £10.
So he's got a whole library of Bly, but without the very high spots on the whole, because he couldn't...
really afford that.
His wife wouldn't let him have it either.
So this is an actual case then?
It is, yes.
I thought it was hypothetical.
No, it's an actual case.
But anyway, to finish my question, so your satisfaction must then come in helping form other people's collections.
That's right.
You must take great satisfaction in seeing, even though it's owned physically by another person, I built this collection.
My taste is involved.
And the one my father built like that.
is the library of the National Museum of Greenwich.
And that's an extraordinary story.
An American came to my father between the wars and said, I want to have sea books.
And so he went all over the place buying sea books for this man.
And every time the chap came, there would be another stack of sea books for him to buy.
And suddenly the Depression hit the stakes with no more dust.
And he couldn't buy any more books.
My father was left with us.
And just at that very moment, the great ship owner in this country, Sir James Caird, had always spelled C-A-I-R-D, came to my father and said, I want to establish a naval museum in Britain.
So there hasn't been one.
And he and his friend, Professor Callender, who was Professor of Naval History of Greenwich, got together.
And one provided the money.
And the other one provided a lot of the expertise.
Sorry, I'm infamous at this sort of thing.
I did a little paper on some of this.
Is there a bill?
In some way, I don't know what I've done with it.
And she made me print it, which was terrible.
I'd like to have a copy of it.
I talk, that's the trouble, and I don't write enough.
But I was going to say, and so this naval collection began to build up.
And then it was established there at Greenwich, was opened by the Queen in 1930, the King, sorry, in 1938 or thereabouts.
And my father was the principal advisor for books.
And you can go there now and you'll see the finest books to do with the sea, perhaps anywhere in the world.
How about the stuff that he sold to the American?
What happened to that?
I don't want the camera then.
But that must have been pretty choice stuff.
He probably was.
There's a point.
I ought to get our files out.
See where it is.
And find where that is.
That's the investigator for it.
I know, exactly.
How about yourself?
What collections do you personally take great satisfaction in having them put together?
Things modesty overcomes me.
Don't live.
or throw modesty to the winds.
I think it's black at the moment.
In any case, I suppose probably a professional black would come over me because that would be so recent that one wouldn't talk about it.
Okay, let me ask you another question.
Did you have anything to do with the building of the garden collection with Mr. Peter No More?
No.
Do you know anything about it?
What a strange story.
That introduction to that catalogue is phony.
There's something wrong with that.
When I put off the machine, that will be one of my great chapters, by the way.
If you were able to investigate that, that would be a great piece of investigative journalism.
I've done it rather thoroughly.
Yes.
And it's quite, quite an experiment.
Yes, because... And I'd be happy to tell you a few tidbits if you're interested.
There's corruption there as well.
Ah, yes.
Very strange man.
Very strange.
Haven O'Moore.
Yeah.
If you write that down... Yes, I knew him.
Yes.
Do you know him?
Yeah, well, yes.
What does that say?
Well, it's an anagram or something, is it?
Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes.
He doesn't exist before the 1950s, from all I can find.
Yes.
He comes full-blown out of the 1950s.
And your man, the principal man, is dead, you see, as Warren Howell.
And the other man, Sid, to death with Cain, is dead as well.
Well...
There are a few.
But did you know anything about Omar?
Had you met him at all?
Mystery man.
Well, of course I met him.
Did he come in here?
Did you sell him anything?
I've seen a few people who had some dealings with him over here.
Yes.
You know, none of this money was his, Omar.
He was working with this young fellow's money.
Exactly.
Nobody knew this.
And what happened is, this young man's father, who had made some dollars, all of a sudden one day said, what happened to all this money?
And that started a suit in Superior Court in Massachusetts, where I've been investigating.
And when I started to inquire, the judge impounded the material.
However, strictly as a result of my inquiry,
I will have a court proceeding to unseal it, but in the meantime, I've been able to find the material in other areas, and it's quite fascinating.
And behind the scenes will be solubus.
Behind the scenes will be solubus, yes.
Under the war of solubus.
I start this chapter with a quote from some reason.
I said, why are you selling this?
Why are these people selling this collection?
And the answer was,
Let's just say that two collectors have decided to split up and go their separate ways.
Yes, yes.
And then what I thought, actually, one of the most extraordinary, I give a goose flesh when I think about it.
But that introduction.
Well, I've got better.
See, he founded an institute of traditional science, and he was going to build this institute in Cambridge.
I have all the papers that he filed with the Secretary of State outlining the purpose.
Because he claimed to be a non-profit agency, he had to file pictures with the IRS, which I have.
I'm seeing somebody at 1 o'clock who knew the young man in New York.
She's here in London.
That's a very interesting story.
Investigative journalism.
Indeed.
Applied to book collecting.
That's one chapter.
It's about a chapter or something.
You're saying that as a general statement?
You have to be careful how you print that too.
What are they?
They're things that they want to have for themselves.
Now what's that mean?
They pile them under their chair.
And you go to homes where books have been collected.
There'll sometimes be cardboard boxes still sealed up.
We've just got to have them.
Is it just the acquisition of them that's important, do you think?
For some people.
The general thing that we don't like to talk about is the financial side of it.
Because that's where the thing has changed so much recently, is that you used to be able to collect books so modestly.
There was another library I was much involved with was Fuller.
F-U-L-L-E-R.
Captain A-W-F Fuller, F-U-L-L-E-R.
collected basically objects and paintings, things like Shrunk Heads and Benin Bronzes, and massive stuff that went to the Field Museum in Chicago.
What were the books?
And the books were the backup books with the collection, which were the books of travel on West Africa and Pacific Island.
That fellow was in American?
No, he was English.
And the library went to the Bishop Museum in Honolulu, where you can see it now.
So it was rather sad that the printed books that tied in with the ethnographical collection were separated.
But they went to Honolulu?
Yes.
So there was a major book collection in Honolulu that I didn't know about.
It's amazing these things we learned.
Yes.
But it must be that a lot of librarians, where they've got funds available, like to buy a ready-made collection.
And then another thing you've got to touch on there is what about duplication and triplication?
Well, Texas has 41 copies of Ulysses, for instance.
Well, that's the sort of thing.
But you buy another collection, and there'll be another one in it.
Well, you can make a case possibly there are differences.
If there's Shakespeare's first folios, they may in fact be all different.
Texas claims that Ulysses may have some...
similarity with the first folio in that, because it was such a horrendous job of printing that they were very insane.
Yes, exactly.
Yes, it could be, you see.
And some of this is another one.
That's right.
Which is such a great topic, too.
But eventually, surely, some of those great institutional rare book libraries are going to have to start to show out a bit.
Because there's so much money represented there.
And what good does it do to the university?
Well, isn't that what Morgan and Huntington did?
They would buy, Huntington in particular, would buy on block.
Exactly.
He would take the best things.
On a ship, though.
Right, but he would take the best things.
He, his people, would take the best things.
And then, where there was duplication, they would sell.
No, the library, not a library.
That is Wellcome, the drug firm.
I don't know that library.
The Wellcome Library in the Euston Road.
I don't know that.
on science and medicine.
And he bought literally by the ship boat.
And where is this again?
In the Eastern Road.
Eastern Road.
That's here?
Yes.
Okay.
The Wellcome Library.
Some, I think, has been transferred recently to the Science Museum, I'm not sure of it.
But that's a very great collection of rare books on medicine and science.
Well, Ian Fleming's collection in science was outstanding.
That went to the Lilly Library.
Exactly.
Another book just out, which I ought to buy and you ought to get, is the history of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle on Time.
Okay.
History?
Of the Literary and Philosophical Institute of Newcastle on Time, which was one of the great working men's libraries.
Okay.
This is available out there now?
I've ordered it.
I don't know where it's come yet.
History of the Literary and Philosophical Institute of Newcastle and... On time.
Newcastle on time.
Okay.
Because this was the great thing in the mid-19th century, was people lifting themselves by their bootstraps to educate themselves.
And so these libraries were established, working men's libraries, for people who learned to think.
The poor man's university sort of idea.
And those libraries have been pillaged all over Britain.
Right.
Because.
This is all in this book?
There must be something in there.
Because people would get together and say, what is the good of this old library?
When what we want now is some more food machines or something for the club.
And sell it.
And one bookseller in England has done a great deal of buying up these.
The book that he is.
And that's Hang On Why.
Richard Booth.
Have you come across him?
Yes.
Perhaps the most picturesque of the book years in this country, who made himself the king of Hay-on-Wye.
What is that?
Richard Booth.
Extraordinary chap.
When do you want me to go?
I think you'd better go now.
Okay.
There's loads of things.
Can we get back together again?
Yes, any time.
How long are you in London?
I'm leaving Sunday.
Need your money.
I have my wife and dad is with me my little good and so they're visiting Do you have ghosts on the second floor I did a television program about that last week It is the most haunted house in London there are books on that but none of us have ever seen it And we're doing a book launch here you are of the most wonderful
Bibliography that's being published tomorrow, Oxford University Press, of books by William Travellers.
Really?
And there's the making of a collection.
So what time is this that you're doing?
We're having this... I'll just give you an invitation.
And are you married to a great woman?
A lovely, beautiful woman.
Yes.
Why not bring her?
Because we have book launches at Marietta's Bookstore about once every ten years.
I'd love to have...
But if it's black tie, I can't because I can't because I don't have a taxi anymore.
Where do you want me to go?
Grandfather, Grandfather, did you ask that?
What was he put in the hospital before?
Well, I saw a booklet downstairs that said 50 minutes.
Do you have a question?
Uh, so, sir, I can tell you, there's one out.
That's the incredible, or, um, uh, the manual.
Yes.
Have you offered a problem?
You're one of them?
Uh, no, I, uh... Is it the one at all, then?
I was out with, you know,
Michael Davis is the money man.
That's right, that's right, that's right.
But here's something that didn't fit on the scene at all, it was a fail.
Anyway, we've constructed this a lot of fantasy around, I don't assume that identity will have no more, which has a choice in names, you know.
I mean, it's obviously in a scene, you know.
the biography he gave in the... Well, he claims his kinship with... He doesn't exist.
Is that right?
Yes, yes, yes, I did.
I got... I spent a whole morning working on it.
I'm recreating this, okay?
You're welcome.
I spent a whole morning working on it, and I got a friend of ours there who assured me that the name
who had no more claims for his Celtic ancestor was actually an impossible name.
I mean, there wouldn't have been a Celtic king called Omore.
I told you it was have no more, right?
He's confirming this.
It's a total fantasy.
I actually, then I started barking up a very fruitless tree, which was the Aperture Foundation, which actually does exist.
But they do photographic stuff.
They do photographic stuff.
I could find out nothing at all on his
I've got a copy of his foundation.
I've got everything on that.
Would you like to talk?
I'd love to know about it.
May I talk with him?
For some reason, Ed has got himself into it.
And of course, where I came into this was the Queerer Library in Chicago.
That was so dreadful.
I know.
I'm smiling because of... I'm not smiling because of that.
I'm smiling because we have some things to talk about.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, it is great fun, the whole thing.
Well, do you want to talk to it?
You know what?
I left my case for this in your office.
Yes, come on.
I want to just shut the... In a way, they invented collecting... They sort of invented it.
Can I have your full name, please?
Edward Maggs.
You're Edward Maggs?
And you're a relation to the... No, John's my father.
John's your father.
So you're fifth generation.
So you're born into this as well.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, you're saying that... No, not at all.
It's a wonderful business.
It's a great business for the generalists.
Mm-hmm.
Uh...
Did you always know that you'd be a book leader?
No, I assumed I wouldn't be.
And I tried quite hard and ended up managing and playing in it and trying to avoid it.
But it was just like anything.
Do you always remember books?
Did you always have a reverence for books?
Yeah, yeah, pretty much.
As your father said, the first thing you learned is don't put a T-cap on the book.
That's right, that's right.
I just bought the cover when he opened the book.
I'm going to turn this on the other side.